Or it's a dream from where we left off last time we have the empty javascript file.
So we need to be using Jay query and javascript to actually grab elements from the document object model.
But what we also now have is the Tim Allen CSSA done for our project.
There's a couple of things we're going to need to be able to do.
One thing we need to ask for the player names and then assign them their colors red and blue and I've
picked some shades using RSGB.
Then the next thing we need to do is figure out a function that can change the color of a button.
So if I click somewhere here I want to be able to change the color of that button.
Now remember we also need to figure out what a buttons color is.
So I need to make two functions that are very similar to each other.
One is to find what color a button is.
If I click somewhere on a row or column index and the other one is if I supply a row index and column
index to actually change the color.
So we'll be programming those out or coding them out.
Then I also need a function that checks what is the bottom most available row.
So if I click on one of these columns I want my chip to go all the way down until it finally meets the
last available gray button.
So if these start getting filled up I don't want to mess up.
I just wanted to drop all the way down to the first gray button it seems and we're going to be creating
a function called check bottom that will check for the bottom and then supply back the row.
Then we need to create a function that checks for inputs are the same color to actually check for Connect
4.
And then we need to create the when checks.
So we do make a check for horizontal wins.
We need to make a check for vertical wins and then we need to make a check for diagonal wins.
After that we to check some way that the game has ended either.
Everything is filled up and nobody's won or somebody has won.
After that we want to actually create the game logic where we start with player 1 player one will select
something we'll fill it in.
Then it goes player 2 they'll fit it in.
And as I keep filling it in.
We keep checking to see if somebody has one.
And once somebody has won we end the game and ask if they want to play again.
Or along those lines.
All right.
Definitely check out the solution file for this.
There are a lot of helpful functions there.
And if you scroll all the way to the bottom of the solutions file there are actually help or functions
that are commented out to help you understand how a table row index and a table column index work.
It's actually kind of backwards.
For instance the very bottom row the index here is row index five.
So I have to check from five four three two one zero instead of 0 1 2 3 4 5 and the Collin's kind of
feel backwards as well.
So just keep that in mind if you're confused on the indexing.
Definitely check out all the way at the bottom of the solutions.
Javascript file.
There are some help or functions to help you understand.
So one of them is change color on click so you can click on any of them it'll change the color for you.
And the other one is to actually report back the index location of any button you click.
So those are there to help you.
They're not actually there for the game logic.
Let's get started.
I'm going to be doing a mix of coding and then copying pasting from the solution.
If there's too much code just to save time I'm going to copy and paste the very first lines of code
and walk through them.
So here are the first lines of code.
Here I can see them asking player 1 through a prompt and to your name and you will be blue.
And then I'm saying that player wants color.
Is this RSGB code that I found.
And then I have Player 2 and I'm saying player to enter your name you will be read.
And I set them to RGV value.
So this is some R.G. because he read and this is some R.G. be code for it like a light blue.
And keep in mind the music.
RG B because you'll be using a query to change the actual color of the buttons.
It expects a string in the form of R.G. B and it also expects it with this sort of spacing here.
So keep that in mind.
That's why this is in this specific format instead of just like a hex code.
Then I have game on which is equal to true.
That's going to be a boolean variable that tells me whether that game is running or not.
And then I have a table here which is just a query call to table TR OK.
Up next let's create a report when function.
Again I'm just going to kind of copy and paste this one so report when it takes in a row number and
a column number and then it says you one starting at this row column and this is just console log.
So this is for a record for us so that we can check at the very end once the game is over we log what
was the winning move what row number and what column number.
Did they win it.
This is not necessary for the actual code to work.
This is just more of a convenience function for you as you're debugging.
Now it's actually code something out manually.
So I'm going to create a function called change color and change color function is going to take in
a row index a column index and the color and then we're going to return the table number the table is
just that variable we got object query.
I'm going to use e q and then passen the row index to grab a row.
Then I'm going to find the values for those rows and then I'm going say e q call index and then I will
say that find the button there.
And then I will say C Ss and then passen background color and change its color.
So that's a lot of code.
And there's actually a link to a stack overflow article that really helps you out with this specific
command right here.
So I looked up on stack overflow.
How do I get a table cell by index using a query.
So if I know the row index and column index of a table how can I use a query to grab that particular
cell value from a table and they came out with this really nice code where you just have that table.
Each row index find table cell and then equal column index and then we added find the buttons.
We know there are buttons and then we have CSSA background color and then color.
What I would recommend you do is just kind of follow along with this and keep adding it.
So in the consul of your browser say table e q and then say 1 and then say find T.T. then say that Q
and then some are in that column and then say that find bun.
So peel back the layers so you can understand it yourself.
Next we want to do is create a function called Return color which is going to report back the current
color button.
And this is going to look virtually the same as the first function we just wrote except in this case
we are not changing the color so we don't need the colors to be a parameter.
We don't need it to be an input here and this will just report back to color that we can call a change.
Or excuse me not change color but I'll say return color or report color whatever you want to call it.
And this returns whatever color at this row at this column index for that particular button.
The next function we're going to need is going to be the check bottom and the check bottom function
is going to take in a column index and then return the bottom row that is still gray.
It's actually code this one out
a function check bottom it takes center column index and create a variable here called Color report.
And that's going to just be equal to the return color function.
And we will start at 5 and then say CIOL index.
And the reason we're starting a five flip still actually want that sort of brackets there.
The reason we're starting a five is because I have a for loop in I'm going to go from we'll change this
to be row.
So it's really clear or all started rows equal to 5 and then I'm going to decrease the rows so I'll
say row minus minus and I will keep going in my for loop until a row is zero meaning row greater than
negative 1.
So as long as row is greater than negative 1 starting at row is equal to 5.
Keep subtracting the rows and for each of these one I'm going to do is grab the color report and set
it equal to return color at the current row.
At my current column index and then I will say this if the color report is equal to gray R.G. be one
to a 1 2 8 1 2 8.
Then I'm just going to return that Roe Okay.
So what's actually happening here.
Well I'm taking in a particular column index so someone let's imagine is clicking on a column and then
what I'm doing is I'm grabbing a color report.
Basically this is just the initialization of this value called reports and it's already going to start
at 5 and that's return color row index 5 column index.
So I'm just going up the rows searching for the first gray button that I have available.
Then I want an other function that will check to see if four inputs are the same color.
So we want some sort of color match function.
Let's create one ongoing say function color match check and it will take an 1 2 3 and 4 as variables.
And then we're going to return.
And now let's check if it matches each one.
So I want to check if button 1 matches to.
And if button one matches three and if button one matches for and the other thing I want to check is
to make sure that these buttons aren't gray buttons.
So if I look at my board right now I have Connect Four of gray buttons so I don't want that to be a
glitch or a bug.
So say make sure one is not equal to the RGV color code 1 2 8 1 2 8 1 2 8.
And the other thing I also want to make sure is that if I'm checking for horizontal winds or checking
for vertical ints and accidentally start checking outside of the table cells then I will get undefine
the calls.
So I want to make sure that one is not equal to undefined and that is my color match check centrally
crafts for buttons and mixtures one is equal to 2 3 and four.
And it also makes sure that one is not gray so we don't have four gray buttons.
And we also don't have four undefined slots being matched together and think we have a color match.
Now it's time to actually copy and paste the when checks.
So we have three functions for checking wins the horizontal and vertical and check in then diagonal
one check.
Let me copy and paste this code here.
It's a lot of code.
So you may have to zoom out to really see it well but I'm going to briefly explain it.
But before I do that let me just explain the general logic over at the actual board.
So let me bring back the board over here.
This is what the board looks like.
If I want to check for a horizontal when what I'm going to do is starting over here.
I'll check these for equal to each other.
If they're not all move one over check of these four equal to each other if not move one over check
these four equal to each other if not all move one over check of these four equal to each other which
means for every row I need to do four horizontal checks and I know I have then six columns which means
if I come over here to horizontal wind check that's exactly what we're doing in the four loops.
I'm checking the columns.
So there's six columns here meaning excuse me.
Are six rows level of rows and there are four columns that I'm going to have to iterate through to check
and the phrasing here reflects that better than I just said basically for the six rows for four columns
do the color match check on a roll call and then RHO call plus 1 same row call plus 2 x etc..
So we're just moving along.
Check in these four.
And then we're going to do that for six of these rows and then I'm going to call report win so that
I console log that a horizontal one occurred and then I want to return true if there was a horizontal
when check.
If not I'm going to just continue.
So this is going to go all the way and it's going to return true if there's a horizontal wind check.
If not if nothing happened nothing's going to actually be reported back.
This continue keyword is something we may not have encountered before but it basically just tells the
code to continue and not do anything.
The other thing you could have just done here is log something or just alert it something probably a
log so you're not constantly alerting your user logs something like no match at row or col.
Now if we scroll down now we have the vertical in check and it's doing a really similar thing.
It's going for the six columns here in this column and of course we have 1 2 3 4 5 6 7.
We have seven columns which makes sense because going up to 7 and then the rows when you check here
are 1 2 3 4 go up 1 1 2 3 4 go up 1 more 1 2 3 4 and that's it.
That's your limit.
Other than that you're already off the table.
So here we can see that I am just going to go through seven columns go three rows off the bottom do
a color match check and then report the win return true.
If I get the verdict one check otherwise I'm just going to continue doing these four loops then they
have the diagonal in check and this one's a little more complicated but it's a very similar idea to
the first two.
Basically what I'm doing is I'm saying the very first horizontal or excuse me diagonal check happens
right here.
Hopefully see this along and then I'm going to continue doing the diagonal checks that essentially have
a negative slope and then I'm going to do all the diagonal checks to have a positive slope.
And this is where four loops come into play.
And then we have the color match checks and we can see here we scroll over for some of them I'm saying
plus one plus one plus two plus two.
And the other ones I'm saying minus one plus one minus two plus two.
That's basically a difference between the positive slopes for the diagonal checks versus the negative
slopes for the diagonal checks.
Essentially whichever direction it's going diagonal from left up to the right or from left down to the
right.
OK so we have those three functions that took for wins.
What I want to do is now actually create the game logic for the next lecture.
We'll be showing you how to create that game logic as well as a few more help for functions to really
help us out as far as understanding how this game is working.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.